# Acknowledgements

If I have seen further it is by standing on ye shoulders of Giants — Isaac Newton The vast majority of the ideas and elements in the proposed language can be found in the computer science and computer graphics literature. Dave Baldwin of 3Dlabs wrote the white paper that formed the basis for the OpenGL Shading Language. His original credits included the following:

- AT&T for the C language,
- Pixar for RenderMan,
- UNC for Pixel Flow language and their programmable OpenGL interface,
- Stanford for their shading language work,
- SGI for OpenGL (obviously) and their shading language research,
- Colleagues at 3Dlabs for the frequent active discussions that helped to clarify many points Dave Baldwin has continued to be involved in the design of the shading language as it has developed.

Randi Rost and John Kessenich edited several public versions of the shading language white paper and created the first version of this specification document. Antonio Tejada of 3Dlabs wrote the first parser for the language to help resolve some of the fundamental language design issues.

Randi Rost, John Kessenich, Barthold Lichtenbelt, and Steve Koren of 3Dlabs formed the team that took over the design and implementation of the OpenGL Shading Language once the initial direction had been established. This group has been responsible for producing the publicly available specifications and source code for the OpenGL Shading Language, for producing the initial implementation of the language compiler and supporting OpenGL extensions, and for modifying the design of the language along the way.

Dave Baldwin, Dale Kirkland, Jeremy Morris, Phil Huxley, and Antonio Tejada of 3Dlabs have been involved in many of the OpenGL Shading Language discussions and have provided a wealth of good ideas and encouragement as we have moved forward. Other members of the 3Dlabs driver development teams in Egham, U.K., Huntsville, AL, and Austin, TX have contributed as well. The 3Dlabs executive staff should be commended for having the vision to move forward with the OpenGL Shading Language proposal and the courage to allocate resources to its development. Thanks to Osman Kent, Neil Trevett, Jerry Peterson, and John Schimpf in particular.

Numerous other people have been involved in the OpenGL Shading Language discussions. We would like to thank our colleagues and fellow ARB representatives at ATI, SGI, NVIDIA, Intel, Microsoft, Evans & Sutherland, IBM, Sun, Apple, Imagination Technologies, Dell, Compaq, and HP for contributing to discussions and for helping to move the process along. In particular, Bill Licea-Kane and Evan Hart of ATI Research have helped to improve the specification and the language itself through insightful review and studious comments.

A big thank you goes to the software developers who have taken the time to talk with us, send us email, or answer survey questions on OpenGL.org. Our ultimate aim is to provide you with the best possible API for doing graphics application development, and the time that you have spent telling us what you need has been invaluable. A few ISVs lobbied long and hard for certain features, and they were able to convince us to make some significant changes to the original OpenGL 2.0 proposal. Thanks, all you software developers, and keep telling us what you need!

Others that have provided useful comments or review on the shading language include Christian Laforte and Ian Ameline of Alias|Wavefront; Jonathan Putsman of Imagination Technologies; Darren Roberts and Slawek Kilanowski of LightWork Design; John Carmack of ID software; Tim Sweeney and Daniel Vogel of Epic Games; Bert Freudenberg of the University of Magdeburg; Folker Schamel of Spinor; Karel Zuiderveld and Steve Demlow of Vital Images; Christoph Poliwoda, Christof Reinhart, and Wolfgang Roemer of Volume Graphics; Christian Schormann of Pinnacle; Jake Kolb V of Whatif Productions; Mik Wells of Softimage; Delwyn Holroyd and Gerk Huisma of 5D Solutions; Kurt Akeley, Pat Hanrahan, and Bill Mark from Stanford University; and John Stauffer of Apple.

People that have helped shape the direction of shader objects and program objects include Christian Laforte of Alias|Wavefront; Pierre Tremblay of Discreet; Bimal Poddar of Intel; Jon Paul Schelter of Matrox; Jonathan Putsman of Imagination Technologies; Mik Wells of Softimage; Karel Zuiderveld and Steve Demlow of Vital Images; and Tim Sweeney and Daniel Vogel of Epic Games.

This specification document was formally submitted to the OpenGL Architecture Review Board’s GL2 working group in June, 2002. That group was responsible for identifying issues, resolving issues, and finalizing the specification for approval by the OpenGL Architecture Review Board. The following GL2 working group members contributed to the finalization of this specification:. Dave Baldwin, John Kessenich, Steve Koren, Barthold Lichtenbelt, and Randi Rost from 3Dlabs, Inc.; Evan Hart, Bill Licea-Kane (chairman of the ARB-GL2 working group), and Victor Vedovato from ATI Research, Inc.; Dave Zenz of Dell; Brandon Fiflet and Kent Lin of Intel; Pat Brown, Matt Craighead, Cass Everett, Steve Glanville, Jayant Kolhe, and Nick Triantos from NVIDIA; Jon Leech from SGI; Folker Schamel of Spinor; Brian Paul from Tungsten Graphics; Eskil Steenburg from Quel solaar; Marc Olano from the University of Maryland, Baltimore County; Michael McCool from the University of Waterloo; and Matt Cruikshank, Steve Demlow, and Karel Zuiderveld from Vital Images.

Finally, a debt of gratitude is owed to the designers of the C programming language, the designers of RenderMan, and the designers of OpenGL, the three standards that have provided the strongest influence on our efforts. Hopefully, the OpenGL Shading Language will continue their traditions of success and excellence.
